README.md, before:

# Masters-Thesis
@author Kevin Kraus
Masters thesis in the domain of NLP in cooperation with the IAM at UKE: Fine-tuning small LLMs for precision oncology use-cases
# MTB Patient Trial Matching based on a fine-tuned Llama2-7b model
## Repo structure
Beside a whole bunch of utils, scripts and data-related files the most important python files are:
- `scripts/prepare_dataset.py` for preparing the dataset for fine-tuning based on the data provided by TREC Precision Medicine Track Challenge
- `finetuning.py` for running the fine-tuning on a given `base_model` (checkpoints/meta-llama)
- `testing.py` containing of all relevant code for testing the fine-tuned model in inference (eval) mode and producing outputs that are compatible with running the official `trec_eval` evaluation script as well as the `utils/eval_utils.py` file
- `run_experiment.py` brings together all scripts to fine-tuning a model, running inference on it and evaluating it with common metrics. While doing so, all relevant parameters are tracked via mlflow. To view results of a run simply run `mflow ui` to start the tracking server.
- `main.py` Only relevant if multiple experiments should be ran sequentially. To do so, define arguments for the given keys in the `configs/experiment_definitions.yaml` (or add new keys, based on the variables in the `configs/experiments.py` file) and run `main.py`. The script will simply generate all permutations of the given inputs and create commands which are then executed.
## Setup
- Run `pip install -r requirements.txt`
- Run `pip uninstall transformer-engine`, since there is some kind of bug caused by the `peft` library import

## Credits
This repository is an adaptaion of the llama-recipies repository by facebookresearch: https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama-recipes

# Running Experiments
## Single experiment
- run_experiment.py
- Command line arguments

## Multiple experiments
- main.py
- experiment_definitions.yaml

### Merging weights
Since we usually train with a PEFT method (LoRA) the generated output are adapter weights instead of a "full" model. Even tough they can be loaded in combination with the base-model, there is an option to merge the weights with the base-model if required (e.g. for uploading to huggingface-hub).
Run `python utils/merge_lora_weights.py --base_model BASE_MODEL_NAME --peft_model PEFT_MODEL_NAME` to merge the weights and save a new model to the same directory.


# Notes on data
- Based on .xml files of fully scraped clinical trials from clinicaltrials.gov
- Since GPU restrictions and issues in running evaluation of model (nan), max-word size was set on 1000 for now. Further experimentation will show, if more words are required, even tough the restriction only removes out ~10% of data, so still enough to work with
- First tries to use whole XML ended desastreous. No chance to fine-tune model except with e.g. 10 A100 GPUs of power.
- Right now, only simple data-cleaning, as well as max-word count are done. Further experementation is required, to see how data can be optimally prepared to achieve best results by acceptable computational costs.


## Data structure
### Extracted keys from XML files
Since the Clinical Trials XML files are very big, we need to reduce it, since we have uper bounds in token size due to the model as well as the computation resources. Hence in the `data_preparation.py` script, we recursively go trough the XML file and extract following keys:
- `brief_title`
- `brief_summary`
- `eligibility`
  - `criteria`
    - `textblock`
  - `gender`
  - `minimum_age`
  - `maximum_age`
  - `healthy_volunteers`
These extracted items are embedded into the `input` field of the final data JSON.

### Data Versions
For the different experiments, different datasets where created with different instruction prompts. They are versioned by `v1`, `v2`, `v3`, ...
For each data-version a seperate branch was created. Those branches are might differ to the current dev/ main branch,what is neglectable since we only use them to recreate data for a certain experiment.

### Generation
The dataset generates a big dataset based on the topic-Clinical Trial combinations from TREC 2021 and TREC 2022. Utilising the given qrel files, we add labels to each combination. With a `topic_year ` field we assure that we can track the outputs back to the inputs, since we will have same ids based on the topic-NCT ID combination.
After the initial data extraction and reformation, we split it into train and test data sets. 
The test data set is solely for testing reasons and was never fed into the system. Herefore we extract 1000 samples from the shuffled resulting dataset. 
Those samples are removed from the training/ eval dataset and saved as `ct_test_{VERSION}`. The test dataset has a similar naming convention: `ct_train_{VERSION}`


# Testing a model
The model saves the whole output as JSON file based on a predefined response structure (prompt definition).
From there, the JSON can be used and restructured to create required data output formats.

## TREC evaulation system requires
| Row   | Content                        |
|-------|--------------------------------|
| 1     | TOPIC_NO in the first row     |
| 2     | Q0 constant in the second row (0) |
| 3     | NCT ID in the third row       |
| 4     | The RANK for the document     |
| 5     | The SCORE for the document (probability) |
| 6     | The run name                  |

## Evaluation Script
| Row   | Content                        |
|-------|--------------------------------|
| 1     | TOPIC_NO in the first row     |
| 2     | Q0 constant in the second row (0) |
| 3     | NCT ID in the third row       |
| 4     | The SCORE for the document (probability)|
| 5     | The label predicted by the model |

Commit message:

outlined changes required to run eval_utils.py. Couldn't test model response since all GPUs are busy

README.md, after:

# Masters-Thesis
@author Kevin Kraus
Masters thesis in the domain of NLP in cooperation with the IAM at UKE: Fine-tuning small LLMs for precision oncology use-cases
# MTB Patient Trial Matching based on a fine-tuned Llama2-7b model
## Repo structure
Beside a whole bunch of utils, scripts and data-related files the most important python files are:
- `scripts/prepare_dataset.py` for preparing the dataset for fine-tuning based on the data provided by TREC Precision Medicine Track Challenge
- `finetuning.py` for running the fine-tuning on a given `base_model` (checkpoints/meta-llama)
- `inference.py` containing of all relevant code for testing the fine-tuned model in inference (eval) mode and producing an output .json file containing all relevant information, such as internal ID, topic year, probability, prediction
- `run_experiment.py` brings together all scripts to fine-tuning a model, running inference on it and evaluating it with common metrics. While doing so, all relevant parameters are tracked via mlflow. To view results of a run simply run `mflow ui` to start the tracking server.
- `main.py` Only relevant if multiple experiments should be ran sequentially. To do so, define arguments for the given keys in the `configs/experiment_definitions.yaml` (or add new keys, based on the variables in the `configs/experiments.py` file) and run `main.py`. The script will simply generate all permutations of the given inputs and create commands which are then executed.

## Data availablity
For the sake of experimentation and future work, the final version of the used dataset is uploaded to huggingface-hub, so no one has to figure out how to run my data_extraction and preparation scripts.
`Kevinkrs/mtb_ai_v3`

## Model availability
The model is available on huggingface-hub as well if someone wants to play with it!
`Kevinkrs/mtb_ai_v1`

## Setup
- Run `pip install -r requirements.txt`
I might be, that model is not running. If so, try: `pip uninstall transformer-engine`, since there is some kind of bug caused by the `peft` library import in a current huggingface/transformer version


# Running Experiments
## Single experiment
To run a single experiment, run `main.py` and either add required arguments to `configs/experiment.py` or pass them as command-line arguments.
Important are the flags `--run_training`, `--run_inference`, `--run_eval`. They decided if the whole cycle of fine-tuning, model inference and inference evaluation are run. This comes in handy e.g. when a base-model was fine-tuned and one only wants to tweak on different inference parameters (e.g. temperature).

## Multiple experiments
Adjust required parameters in `configs/experiment_definitions.yaml` to automatically run all possible parameter combinations. If there is already a fine-tuned model, the `--run_training` flag is automatically set to `False`

## Merging weights
Since we usually train with a PEFT method (LoRA) the generated output are adapter weights instead of a "full" model. Even tough they can be loaded in combination with the base-model, there is an option to merge the weights with the base-model if required (e.g. for uploading to huggingface-hub).
Run `python utils/merge_lora_weights.py --base_model BASE_MODEL_NAME --peft_model PEFT_MODEL_NAME` to merge the weights and save a new model to the same directory.

# Notes on data
- Based on .xml files of fully scraped clinical trials from clinicaltrials.gov
- Since GPU restrictions and issues in running evaluation of model (nan), max-word size was set on 1000 for now. Further experimentation will show, if more words are required, even tough the restriction only removes out ~10% of data, so still enough to work with
- First tries to use whole XML ended desastreous. No chance to fine-tune model except with e.g. 10 A100 GPUs of power.
- Right now, only simple data-cleaning, as well as max-word count are done. Further experementation is required, to see how data can be optimally prepared to achieve best results by acceptable computational costs.


## Data structure
### Extracted keys from XML files
Since the Clinical Trials XML files are very big, we need to reduce it, since we have uper bounds in token size due to the model as well as the computation resources. Hence in the `data_preparation.py` script, we recursively go trough the XML file and extract following keys:
- `brief_title`
- `brief_summary`
- `eligibility`
  - `criteria`
    - `textblock`
  - `gender`
  - `minimum_age`
  - `maximum_age`
  - `healthy_volunteers`
These extracted items are embedded into the `input` field of the final data JSON.

### Data Versions
For the different experiments, different datasets where created with different instruction prompts. They are versioned by `v1`, `v2`, `v3`, ...
For each data-version a seperate branch was created. Those branches are might differ to the current dev/ main branch,what is neglectable since we only use them to recreate data for a certain experiment.

### Generation
The dataset generates a big dataset based on the topic-Clinical Trial combinations from TREC 2021 and TREC 2022. Utilising the given qrel files, we add labels to each combination. With a `topic_year ` field we assure that we can track the outputs back to the inputs, since we will have same ids based on the topic-NCT ID combination.
After the initial data extraction and reformation, we split it into train and test data sets.
The test data set is solely for testing reasons and was never fed into the system. Herefore we extract 1000 samples from the shuffled resulting dataset.
Those samples are removed from the training/ eval dataset and saved as `ct_test_{VERSION}`. The test dataset has a similar naming convention: `ct_train_{VERSION}`


# Testing a model
The model saves the whole output as JSON file based on a predefined response structure (prompt definition).
From there, the JSON can be used and restructured to create required data output formats.

## TREC evaulation system requires
| Row   | Content                        |
|-------|--------------------------------|
| 1     | TOPIC_NO in the first row     |
| 2     | Q0 constant in the second row (0) |
| 3     | NCT ID in the third row       |
| 4     | The RANK for the document     |
| 5     | The SCORE for the document (probability) |
| 6     | The run name                  |

## Evaluation Script
| Row   | Content                        |
|-------|--------------------------------|
| 1     | TOPIC_NO in the first row     |
| 2     | Q0 constant in the second row (0) |
| 3     | NCT ID in the third row       |
| 4     | The SCORE for the document (probability)|
| 5     | The label predicted by the model |


# Credits
This repository is an adaptation of the llama-recipies repository by facebookresearch: https://github.com/facebookresearch/llama-recipes
